Social scientists and educators have been examining the relationship between adolescents’ perceived social support and educational aspirations for decades. Here, social support can be defined as “information which affords the perception of being cared for, esteemed and valued by members of one’s social network” (Dubow, Tisak, Causey, Hryshko, & Reid, 1991) and as “the availability of people on whom we can rely, and who let us know that we are cared for and valued” (Sarasin, Levine, Basham & Sarason, 1983). Research demonstrates that adolescents’ perceived social support significantly influences their hopes and goals for the future (Sirin, Diemer, Jackson, Gonsalves & Howell, 2004).

According to Cape Breton professors Julie Wall, Katherine Covell, and Peter D. Macintyre, adolescents with strong social support tend to believe that they’ll be able to successfully gain access to educational and occupational opportunities in the future (Wall, Covell, MacIntyre, 1998). Conversely, adolescents with low social support may believe that they’ll be unable to gain access to educational and occupational opportunities in the future (Wall, Covell, MacIntyre, 1998). For this research, Wall, Covell, and Macintyre surveyed 260 adolescents (42.3% female, mean age 15.37 years) using the Limited Access to Opportunity Scale (LAOS), the Social Support Appraisals Scale (APP), and Aspirations and Expectations scale to assess adolescent social support, perceived opportunities, aspirations and expectations. Using path analysis, the authors found that family (t = 4.3), teacher (t = 3.6), and peer (t = 2.4) support all significantly (t > 2.0) led to perception of opportunity. Additionally, they found a significant path (t = 3.6) from perception of opportunity to educational expectations, as well as from educational expectations to education aspirations (t = 9.6). Clearly, this research shows that strong social support significantly influences perception of opportunity, educational expectations, and educational aspirations in a positive direction.

Interestingly, researchers from Safarik University in the Slovak Republic gathered different findings after surveying 1992 Slovak adolescents (53.5% female, mean age of 16.9 years). Using the SF-36, the Measure of Perceived Social Support scale, the Antonovsky scale, and a one item scale, researchers collected data on students’ socioedconomic backgrounds, school-related factors (e.g. school atmosphere), perceived social support, sense of coherence, and self-rated health (Geckova, Tavel, Dijk, Abel, Reijneveld, 2010). The results of this research demonstrate significant association between paternal social support and adolescent educational aspiration, but did not find a significant relationship between social support from the mother or friends with educational aspiration (Geckova, Tavel, Dijk, Abel, Reijneveld, 2010).

To answer the research question “Is there a relationship between adolescents’ perceived social support and educational aspirations?”, I’ve decided to work with the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth) codebook and data set. To do this, I’ve created a codebook consisting of social support and educational aspiration variables, namely AddHealth Questionnaire Section 35, which “measures the extent to which the respondent perceives himself as being supported by parents, teachers, friends, etc” and AddHealth Questionnaire Section 38, which measures “educational aspirations.” Based on previous research, I believe that there will be a significant positive association between adolescents’ perceived social support and educational aspirations.



Works Cited

Madarasova Geckova, A., Tavel, P., van Dijk, J.P. et al. Factors associated with educational aspirations among adolescents: cues to counteract socioeconomic differences?. BMC Public Health 10, 154 (2010) doi:10.1186/1471-2458-10-154

Wall, Julie & Covell, Katherine & Macintyre, Peter. (1999). Implications of Social Supports for Adolescents’ Education and Career Aspirations. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne des sciences du comportement. 31. 63-71. 10.1037/h0087074.
